ReinDiffuse: Crafting Physically Plausible Motions with Reinforced Diffusion
Model

arXiv:2410.07296v2 [cs.CV] 15 Oct 2024

Gaoge Han
Tencent AI Lab

Mingjiang Liang
University of Technology Sydney

Yongkang Cheng
Tencent AI Lab

Jinglei Tang
Northwest A&F University

Wei Liu
University of Technology Sydney

Abstract

Shaoli Huang*
Tencent AI Lab

approach addresses the critical gap left by existing methods, which either struggle with physical credibility [34] or
are bogged down by the complexities of physics simulations [43].
Our idea is inspired by the success of strong alignment
capabilities demonstrated by reinforcement learning (RL)
in natural language processing (NLP) and computer vision.
InstructGPT [26] devises a human feedback reward system to enhance model alignment with human intent using
RL. [30] applies RL to fine-tune computer vision models
with task rewards of object detection/segmentation, showing a surprising effectiveness of lifting the alignment between model predictions and intended usage. Drawing from
this insight, we explore reinforcement learning methods for
improving the alignment between generated motion fidelity
and adherence to physical laws for Motion Diffusion Model
(MDM) [34]. However, the incompatibility between RL
and MDM and designing reasonable reward functions to incorporate physical commonsense are challenging.
For the incompatibility problem, our solution hinges on
a unique adaptation of Motion Diffusion Model [34]. Inspired by the classic RL algorithms [33, 38] and reparameterization techniques [19], we retool these models to output a parameterized distribution of actions, making them
compatible with reinforcement learning paradigms. This
adaptation is key to bridging the gap between the continuous value output space of MDM and the probability distribution output of reinforcement learning models. For the
physical plausibility goal, it is challenging to learn physical laws through the design of reward functions without
physical simulation. Considering our goal is to generate
physically plausible motion, we do not necessarily need the
model to truly understand the physical laws. Instead, we
aim to encourage the model to minimize physical issues
caused by violations of these laws. With this perspective,
we design reward function that focuses on perceiving four

Generating human motion from textual descriptions is
a challenging task. Existing methods either struggle with
physical credibility or are limited by the complexities of
physics simulations. In this paper, we present ReinDiffuse
that combines reinforcement learning with motion diffusion
model to generate physically credible human motions that
align with textual descriptions. Our method adapts Motion
Diffusion Model to output a parameterized distribution of
actions, making them compatible with reinforcement learning paradigms. We employ reinforcement learning with the
objective of maximizing physically plausible rewards to optimize motion generation for physical fidelity. Our approach
outperforms existing state-of-the-art models on two major
datasets, HumanML3D and KIT-ML, achieving significant
improvements in physical plausibility and motion quality.
Project: https://reindiffuse.github.io/

1. Introduction
The quest to generate human motion from textual descriptions has been a frontier in several domains like augmented reality/virtual reality (AR/VR), animation, gaming,
and robotics. This pursuit, however, has been marred by a
key challenge: producing motions that are not only realistic
but also adhere to the stringent laws of physics. This paper
introduces an innovative approach that integrates physical
commonsense on top of existing motion diffusion models
without having to resort to physical simulations.
We unveil a novel method that combines the strengths
of reinforcement learning with motion diffusion models to
create human motions that are not only physically credible but also align seamlessly with textual descriptions. This
* corresponding author

1

MDM

“A man jumps then kicks the air whilst moving to the opposite end
of the room.”

“A person is playing Jump Rope.”

Floating

Clipping&Floating

Clipping&Floating

Penetration

Penetration Floating

Ours

Figure 1. Our ReinDiffuse can generate physically plausible motion, effectively eliminating common physical issues such as floating,
penetration, foot clipping, and skating. ReinDiffuse enables MDM to learn physical commonsense with reinforcement learning.

cally credible human motions.

types of illogical behaviors that do not have physical validity, including sliding steps, floating, ground penetration and
foot clipping.
The heart of our approach is reinforcement learning policy optimization combined with meticulously crafted, physically plausible reward functions. We perform RL policy
gradient optimization with importance sampling to maximize the expected reward of motion diffusion model’s motion output, which involves two distinct models: a pretrained policy for action sampling and a RL policy that updates based on these samples. This optimization strategy
ensures a harmonious balance between exploration and exploitation, crucial for learning realistic motion generation.
Our method’s efficacy is validated on two major datasets,
HumanML3D [8] and KIT-ML [31]. The results are compelling. We achieve a remarkable improvement in physical
plausibility and motion quality, significantly outperforming
existing state-of-the-art models. Notably, our approach exhibits a notable enhancement in motion quality as evidenced
by a 29% improvement in the Frechet Inception Distance
(FID) on the HumanML3D benchmark, and a 34% improvement on the KIT-ML benchmark. As shown in Fig. 1,
our ReinDiffuse effectively mitigate common physical issues compared to the state-of-the-art MDM [34] methods.
Our contributions are manifold and significant:

• An innovative adaptation of MDM for compatibility
with reinforcement learning, using parameterized action distributions.
• A reinforcement learning optimization strategy paired
with a physically plausible reward, designed to optimize motion generation for physical fidelity.

2. Related Work
Human Motion Generation. Human motion generation can be broadly classified into two categories: conditioned and unconditioned. Conditioned inputs include
text [2, 5, 9, 11, 12, 29], music [20, 21, 23, 35], audio [1, 44],
images [6, 32], objects [22], and trajectories [17, 37, 40].
Unconditioned models are represented by [28, 42, 48, 49].
Recently, extensive research has been conducted on
text-driven motion generation models, which can be divided into two main paradigms: Vector Quantized Variational Autoencoder (VQ-VAE) [36] based and diffusionbased. Both paradigms demonstrate strong capabilities
in diversity and conditional matching. Notable VQ-VAEbased models include T2M-GPT [45] and MotionGPT [15],
while diffusion-based models feature MotionDiffuse [46],
MDM [34], and ReMoDiffuse [47].
T2M-GPT [45] proposes a two-stage motion training
method that incorporates convolution-based VQ-VAE and

• A novel approach that synergizes motion diffusion
models with reinforcement learning to generate physi2

Generative Pretrained Transformer(GPT). MotionGPT [15]
learns a motion-specific VQ-VAE model that converts raw
motion data into a sequence of motion tokens and introduces a pretrained language model for motion-relevant generation tasks. MotionDiffuse [46] is the first diffusion-based
text-driven motion generation framework, supporting multilevel manipulation to handle fine-grained text descriptions
of body parts. MDM [34] predicts instead of noise to apply the geometric loss in the multi-step diffusion process.
ReMoDiffuse [47] extends existing motion models with retrieval capabilities to enhance generalizability and diversity.
While current motion generation models have made significant progress in conditioned matching and diversity,
they still face challenges in incorporating physical commonsense, as they are primarily designed to fit data distributions. This limitation leads to the generation of physically
unrealistic motions.
Physically Plausible Motion Generation. Generating
physically plausible motion has always been a challenging
task. In 3D scenes, most models [4, 13, 27] aim to create realistic human motions by combining motion control,
physics-based simulations [25], and reinforcement learning.
In text-to-motion tasks, most models employ transformerbased architectures to fit mocap data and enhance the physical plausibility of generated motion using geometric losses
such as velocity and foot contact loss. Although these methods can produce motion that visually corresponds to text descriptions, they often struggle to capture the nuances of realistic human movement, resulting in animations that may appear awkward or unnatural. These shortcomings stem from
the models’ inability to fully incorporate the complexities
of real-world physics into the generated motions.
PhysDiff [43] proposes an approach to generate physically plausible motion in text-to-motion tasks by combining
diffusion models and physics simulation. Specifically, it iteratively applies a physics-based motion projection module
trained in the Isaac-Gym [25] physics simulator during the
inference stage of the diffusion model. Although these approaches are more successful in generating movements that
adhere to the laws of physics, they come with their own set
of challenges. Physics-based simulations are often computationally intensive and complex, requiring significant resources to accurately simulate aspects like gravity, momentum, and material interactions. This complexity can make
the models slow, difficult to train, and challenging to integrate into real-time applications such as gaming or VR/AR.
In this paper, we explore the possibility of enabling the
model itself to incorporate physical commonsense to generate physically plausible motion, rather than relying on
guidance from training a physics-based motion projection
model in physical simulation like PhysDiff [43]. Simultaneously, we aim to eliminate dependence on physics simulators, as text-to-motion tasks cannot be trained directly

within a physics simulator.
Reinforcement Learning in Artificial Intelligence Generated Content (AIGC). Recently, the significant success
[26, 39] of Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) in Large Language Model (LLM) fine-tuning
has garnered considerable attention from researchers. It
has inspired researchers to explore the extension of RL
applications to other AIGC-related tasks. Fine-grained
RLHF [39] incorporates multiple reward models associated with different human feedback types, which can effectively address the problems of detoxification and longform question answering. ImageReward [41] presents the
first general-purpose text-to-image human preference reward model and tunes diffusion models regarding human
preference scorers. DPOK [7] proposes online reinforcement learning to fine-tune pretrained text-to-image diffusion models using feedback-trained reward on the denoising diffusion stage. DDPO [3] adapts text-to-image diffusion models for directly optimizing diffusion model using
reinforcement learning with downstream objectives, such
as vision-language model feedback, aesthetic quality, compressibility and incompressibility. Inspired by the success
of RL in AIGC, we propose a method that enables direct
RL training on motion diffusion model. Our goal is to facilitate the model’s ability to avoid physical implausibility by
maximizing physical Plausibility rewards.

3. Preliminaries
In this section, we provide a brief background on motion
diffusion model and the reinforcement learning (RL) problem formulation.

3.1. Motion Diffusion Model
Motion diffusion model (MDM) [34] designs a encoderonly transformer network. Unlike other diffusion-based
models, given the noise time-step t and the condition c and
a noised motion ϵt , MDM outputs the human motion x0
rather than the noise in each diffusion step. This allows
MDM to supervise geometric losses (locations, velocities
and foot contact) at each step of diffusion. In the absence of
omitted geometric losses, the objective function of MDM
can be expressed as:
Lsimple = Ex0 ∼D,t∼[1,T ] [∥x0 − G(ϵt , t, c)∥22 ],

(1)

where G denotes the encoder-only transformer model. D
denotes the motion data distribution.
Although MDM’s performance in semantic matching is
less than satisfactory, multiple applications of geometric
losses render MDM still the state-of-the-art model in terms
of physical plausibility. Therefore, to explore the upper limits of the model’s physical performance, we use MDM as
our baseline and conduct reinforcement learning training
based on MDM.
3

3.2. Reinforcement Learning

where υ is an independent noise variable, µ(x0 ) represents
the mean of the Gaussian distribution, derived from the
MDM output x0 = Gθ (ϵt , t, c). The term σ is a predefined standard deviation, typically sampled from a standard
normal distribution. This approach effectively converts the
MDM output into a policy format compatible with reinforcement learning methods. By constructing a Gaussian
distribution in this manner, the model’s output becomes a
set of probable actions, each with a calculable likelihood,
allowing for the application of reinforcement learning techniques to optimize the policy.
Furthermore, an important aspect of our approach is the
initialization of these policy models with pretrained models.
By using models that have already been trained on relevant
motion data, we provide a knowledgeable starting point for
the policy, enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of the
learning process. This pretrained initialization is particularly beneficial in grounding the stochastic outputs of the
MDM within a realistic and physically plausible space. Finally, the reparameterized output x is then used as the policy in the reinforcement learning paradigm. This policy, denoted as πθ (a|ϵt , t, c, σ), represents the probability of taking action a given the observation (ϵt , t, c, σ).

The objective of reinforcement learning (RL) is to enable
an agent to learn through interaction with its environment
in order to achieve the maximum cumulative reward for its
policy network π in a given task. The objective LRL can be
defined as:
LRL = Eτ ∼p(·|π) [R(τ )],
(2)
where R denotes the reward function, τ denotes the trajectories when agent acts in the Markov decision process (MDP).
In the fields of gaming and robotics, reinforcement learning
can be defined as MDP. When RL is applied to the LLM
(e.g. RLHF [26]) and Motion Diffusion Model, it can be
simplified to a single step (called as the multi-armed bandit problem [18, 24]). Reinforcement learning relies on the
model’s output as likelihood for updates, posing a challenge
when directly conducting RL training on the MDM model.
A well-designed reward to improve physically plausibility
is also crucial for reinforcement learning training in MDM.

4. Method
Our methodology combines motion diffusion model
(MDM) and reinforcement learning (RL) to generate realistic human motion based on textual descriptions. This integration is made possible through reparameterization techniques [19] and the utilization of pretrained MDM for initializing policy models. The primary focus is to adapt the
model to effectively harness reinforcement learning and the
elaborated reward function design for physical plausibility,
which ensures the generation of physically plausible motions.

4.2. Reinforcement Learning Training
In a vanilla reinforcement learning framework, a policy
model is responsible for both actions sampling and gradient updating itself based on the reward. This paradigm
can lead to instability in training, because it tends to learn
high correlation between action selection and policy gradient update, reducing exploration and potentially converging to suboptimal solutions. To mitigate this issue, we
employ policy gradient optimization with importance sampling and start from the pretrained model, inspired by
[16, 26]. As shown in Fig. 2, the pretrained policy denoted
as πθP T (a|ϵt , t, c, σ), is primarily responsible for sampling
actions based on adapted MDM distribution. It generates
a variety of actions and computes the physically plausible rewards for these actions. This policy acts as a broadspectrum explorer, providing a diverse set of action-reward
pairs. The RL policy and denoted as πθRL (a|ϵt , t, c, σ), is
focused on learning and gradient optimization. It uses the
actions and reward scores sampled by the pretrained policy
to update and refine its own strategy. This is where the principle of importance sampling comes into play. The RL policy weights the updates based on the importance or utility
of the sampled actions, leading to more informed and stable policy gradient updates. During training, the RL policy
undergoes multiple steps of updates, refining its decisionmaking process. These updates are based on the reward
from the diverse set of actions sampled by the pretrained
policy, ensuring a balanced approach between exploration
and exploitation.

4.1. Adapting MDM with Reparameterization
The characteristic of MDM [34] is that it predicts x0 at
each diffusion step rather than noise, facilitating the use of
established locations and velocities losses. MDM is still
the best T2M model in terms of physical performance in
practical use to date. MDM inherently generates data in a
continuous value format that is not immediately compatible with standard reinforcement learning paradigms. This
incompatibility arises because reinforcement learning typically requires a policy output that represents a probability
distribution of actions, whereas MDM do not naturally provide their outputs in such a probabilistic format.
Inspired by the the construction of policy networks of
classic RL algorithms [33, 38] and reparameterization techniques [19], we reparameterize the output of MDM without
requiring any dedicated modifications to the model architecture. Specifically, we treat the output of the MDM as the
mean of a Gaussian distribution and introduce a predefined
standard deviation. This is represented as:
a = µ(x0 ) + σ · υ,

(3)
4

Physically Plausible Reward
Initial MDM

𝑥𝑎

𝑞(𝑎)

𝑎

𝒩(𝑥𝑎 , 𝜎)

Input

c
t

sample

𝑅(𝑎)

old
Pretrained policy

𝑥𝑡

Skating

Penetration

Clipping

Floating

Tuned MDM

𝑥𝑏

𝓛𝑷𝑷𝑶 (𝒒 𝒂 , 𝒑 𝒂 , 𝑹(𝒂))
𝓛𝒔𝒊𝒎𝒑𝒍𝒆 (𝒙𝒃 , 𝒙𝟎 )

𝑝(𝑎)

𝒩(𝑥𝑏 , 𝜎)
RL policy

𝑥𝑡

𝑥0

𝒄

Gradient Motion noise GT motion Reward function Text embedding

Figure 2. Overview of our ReinDiffuse training framework. Given the condition c, time step t and noised motion ϵt . Initial MDM output
the xa as the mean of Gaussian distribution and use the fixed σ as the standard deviation. We sample a from the distribution to compute the
physically plausible rewards and obtain the motion likelihood q(a) and p(a). We perform RL training using the combined loss of LP P O
and Lsimple with PPO to update tuned MDM.

4.3. Reward Functions for Physical Plausibility

proper weight bearing and balance in the motion sequences.
RFi (a) = exp(−||(aih − hground ) · fFi ||2 ),

It goes without saying that the design of a physically
plausible reward function in the context of Motion Diffusion Model (MDM) is crucial for ensuring that the generated human motion sequences are realistic and adhere to the
laws of physics. To address common issues where the generated motions might violate physical laws, particularly in
the context of bipedal movements, we focus on identifying
four key non-physical behaviors.
Sliding Steps. This occurs when the model generates motions where the feet appear to slide on the surface instead
of showing clear lifting and placing, resembling a slippery
motion. The reward function penalizes motions where foot
movements do not correlate with the expected locomotion,
ensuring that steps are physically grounded and exhibit natural gait patterns. Thus, given an action a, the ith frame’s
reward function can be expressed as:
i−1
i
Rsi (a) = exp(−||(aif t − ai−1
f t ) · fS · fS ||2 ),

(5)

where aih denotes the lowest joint height of ith frame,
hground denotes the height of ground. The default fFi = 0.
When aih > hground , fFi = 1.
Ground Penetration. This refers to scenarios where parts
of the feet or legs incorrectly intersect with the ground
plane, breaking the illusion of physical solidity. The function reduces rewards for any motions where there is unnatural intersection or penetration of the feet with the ground
surface, ensuring the integrity of physical interactions. We
denote the reward function as:
RPi (a) = exp(−||(hground − aih ) · fPi ||2 ),

(6)

where the default fFi = 0. When aih < hground , fFi = 1.
Foot Clipping. Foot Clipping occurs when both feet of the
character model intersect with each other in an unnatural
way. The reward function identifies and penalizes scenarios
where the character’s feet intersect or penetrate each other,
maintaining the physical plausibility of body movements
and postures, which is given as:

(4)

where aif t , (fSi , fSi−1 ) represents the ith foot joint locations
and the contact label, respectively.
Floating. Floating happens when the feet are animated as if
they are not making proper contact with the ground, giving
an impression of hovering or floating. The reward system
is designed to detect and penalize instances where the feet
do not maintain realistic contact with the ground, promoting

RCi (a) = exp(−||(ailf − airf ) · fCi ||2 ),

(7)

where ailf and airf represent the left foot and right foot in
ith frame, respectively. When the distance between foot less
than a threshold, the fCi is equal to 1. otherwise, it is 0.
5

Method

FID↓ R-Precision↑ Skate ratio→ Float (m)→ Penetrate (m)↓ Clip (m)↓

Real

0.002

0.797

0.057

0.704

0.000

0.000

T2M [10]
MotionDiffuse [46]
MDM [34]
PhysDiff [43]

1.067
0.630
0.544
0.433

0.740
0.782
0.611
0.631

0.217
0.426
0.102
-

3.368
2.545
1.757
-

0.235
0.386
0.048
-

0.263
0.217
0.014
-

ReinDiffuse (Ours)

0.385

0.622

0.058

0.711

0.000

0.000

5. Experiments
To evaluate the ability to generate physically plausible motions, we conduct text-to-motion experiments using
two large-scale datasets: HumanML3D [8] and KIT [31].
In Sections 5.1 and 5.2, we present the datasets, evaluation metrics, and implementation details. In Section 5.3,
we compare our quantitative and qualitative results with
state-of-the-art physically plausible methods (MDM [34],
PhysDiff [43]) to address the following questions: (1) Can
our end-to-end reinforcement learning training enable the
model to capture physical commonsense? (2) Can our approach surpass PhysDiff (i.e., training an extra motion projection model in a physical simulation environment) in generating higher-quality motion? In Section 5.4, we conduct
ablation studies to explore the impact of our method’s hyperparameters.

Table 1. Text-to-motion results on HumanML3D [8]. → means
closer to real is better. Bold indicate the best results.
Method

FID↓ R-Precision↑ Skate ratio→ Float (m)→ Penetrate (m)↓ Clip (m)↓

Real

0.031

0.779

0.085

0.930

0.000

0.000

T2M [10]
MDM [34]

2.770
0.497

0.693
0.396

0.364
0.109

3.782
1.509

0.189
0.023

0.283
0.094

ReinDiffuse (Ours) 0.326

0.405

0.087

0.938

0.000

0.000

Table 2. Text-to-motion results on and KIT-ML [31]. → means
closer to real is better. Bold indicate the best results.

5.1. Datasets and Evaluation Metric

These reward functions are integrated into the reinforcement learning optimization with the objective of maximizing cumulative physical credibility rewards in a frame-byframe manner. It’s worth noting that the reward function
we designed is essentially a piecewise function, which is
non-differentiable. Therefore, it cannot be used for finetuning in supervised learning. The total reward Ri (a) for
the ith frame is calculated by accumulating the four rewards. It jointly evaluates the generated motions based on
these physical criteria and provides feedback that guides the
optimization of the models. In addition, our reward functions are designed to calculate rewards on a frame-by-frame
basis within each generated motion sequence. This provides a more granular and precise assessment of the physical plausibility, making it easier to pinpoint and correct nonphysical behaviors quickly.

We provide a brief introduction to two well-known
datasets for text-driven motion generation: HumanML3D
[8] and KIT-ML [31]. Our evaluation metrics focus on three
main aspects: physical plausibility, motion quality, and textconditioned matching.
Datasets. HumanML3D dataset [8] contains 14,616
human motion sequences and 44,970 text descriptions,
comprising 5,371 distinct words. Each motion is paired
with at least three textual descriptions. The average motion
length is 7.1 seconds, with a minimum duration of 2 seconds
and a maximum of 10 seconds. All motions are rescaled to
20 FPS. KIT-ML dataset [31] contains 3,911 human motion sequences and 6,278 textual annotations, averaging 9.5
words per description. Each motion corresponds to multiple
text descriptions, ranging from one to four. The dataset has
a total vocabulary size of 1,623 unique words, disregarding capitalization and punctuation. All pose sequences are
downsampled to 12.5 FPS.
Evaluation Metrics. For physical plausibility metrics,
we report the foot skating ratio (Skate ratio), ground floating
(Float), ground penetration (Penetrate), and foot clipping
(Clip). For each of these metrics, we aggregate all physical issue values within the motion and report the averages
across all samples, excluding foot skate ratios. Following
GMD [17], the foot skating ratio quantifies the percentage
of frames in which either foot skids more than a specified
distance (2.5 cm) while maintaining contact with the ground
(foot height < 5 cm). Ground floating measures the distance
between the ground and the lowest joint positions above the
ground (> 5 cm). Ground penetration measures the distance
between the ground and the lowest joint positions below the
ground (< 0 cm). Foot clipping measures the distance between the left and right feet when it is less than a certain
distance threshold (5 cm). For motion quality, we adopt the
Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) [14], which calculates the

4.4. Loss Functions and Optimization
In our methodology, we optimize the policy using two
distinct objective functions: one based on Proximal Policy
Optimization algorithm (PPO) [33] LP P O and another inherent to the Motion Diffusion Model (MDM) [34] Lsimple
that is defined at Eq. 1. The PPO objective function is designed to refine the policy within the reinforcement learning
framework:
LP P O (θ) = E [min(ri (θ)Ri , clip(ri (θ), 1 − γ, 1 + γ)Ri )] ,
(8)
π
(a|ϵ ,t,c,σ)
where, ri (θ) = πθPRLT (a|ϵtt ,t,c,σ) represents the probability
θ
ratio between the RL policy and the pretrain policy as introduced previously, Ri is the reward function at the ith
frame, and γ is a hyperparameter for clipping. Finally,
we train the framework using the combined object loss
L = LP P O +λLsimple , which ensures a comprehensive optimization that not only enhances the reinforcement learning process but also maintains the capability of MDM.
6

distribution distance between the generated and real motion
under motion features. For text-conditioned matching, we
adopt the R Precision Top 3 metric that calculates the text
and motion embedding [8] Top 3 matching accuracy based
on Euclidean distances.

Method

FID↓ R-Precision↑ Skate ratio→ Float (m)→ Penetrate (m)↓ Clip (m)→

σ = 0.1
σ = 0.15
σ = 0.2
σ = 0.25
σ = 0.3

0.392
0.385
0.395
0.412
0.454

0.621
0.622
0.612
0.624
0.616

0.059
0.058
0.061
0.065
0.071

0.726
0.711
0.740
0.782
0.835

0.000
0.000
0.006
0.016
0.021

0.000
0.000
0.002
0.003
0.005

Table 3. Effect of varying standard deviation σ in RL fine-tuning
on HumanML3D [8].

5.2. Implementation Details
We implement our method based on MDM [34] using
Pytorch and train it on a single NVIDIA A40 GPU. Proximal policy optimization (PPO) [33] is used to train the RL
policy. For the hyperparameters of our RL training, we conduct a meticulous grid search on the test set to determine the
most optimal values. The λ is set to 0.4, the PPO clipping
coefficient γ is set to 0.2, the σ is set to 0.15, and the learning rate is 1e-7, while retaining the default hyperparameters
in AdamW. We fine-tune the MDM using our method for
50K steps. At the end of each iteration, we update the policy
by iterating over the samples for 4 inner epochs with a batch
size of 32. The other settings remain the same as in MDM.
In the inference stage, we directly use the model’s output
x0 to remove the fixed standard deviation and achieve better motion generation performance.

findings demonstrate the compatibility of our method, improving motion quality without compromising other model
capabilities. Furthermore, it indicates the robustness of our
method across datasets of varying sizes.
While a direct comparison of physical metrics with PhysDiff is not feasible, our superior motion quality is reflected
in the FID scores. PhysDiff requires applying 50 steps of
motion projection during the inference stage of MDM, resulting in a 2-3 times slower motion generation compared
to MDM. In contrast, our end-to-end RL training approach,
which removes the standard deviation of σ during inference
and directly utilizes model outputs, ensures that our method
does not decrease MDM’s inference speed.
Qualitative Comparison.
In Fig. 3, we present
qualitative results compared to MDM [34] on the HumanML3D [8] and KIT-ML [31] test sets. Visual comparisons clearly illustrate a substantial improvement in the
physical plausibility of MDM following RL fine-tuning
with the objective of maximizing physical law rewards. In
the first row, the input prompt is “A person crawls forwards
on the floor.” Although the generated motion is semantically
correct, we observe a significant issue of floating in the initial crawling action. In the second row, the input prompt is
“A man is walking forward, favoring his left leg and shifting
his walk. He is possibly drunk.” We can see that the motion
generated by MDM correctly reflects the textual description “favoring his left leg,” and most of the actions have
fewer physical issues. However, there are still noticeable
floating problems at the beginning and end. In comparison
to MDM’s results, our approach generates motion for these
two prompts that is both semantically correct and physically
plausible, eliminating the issue of floating. In the third row,
we present prompts, namely, “A person is sitting while talking with gestures.” and “The person swings a golf club.”
along with motions generated by our method and MDM. By
observing the distance of foot movement from the initial to
the final frame, it is evident that MDM exhibits significant
sliding issues. In contrast, the motion generated by our approach does not exhibit foot sliding problems.

5.3. Comparison to State-of-the-art Approaches
In this section, we present qualitative and quantitative
comparison results on the HumanML3D [8] and KIT-ML
[31] test sets, comparing our method to existing stateof-the-art approaches [34, 43]. It is worth noting that
MDM currently has the best physical performance for textconditioned motion generation models, thanks to the multiple applications of geometric loss during the diffusion process. To explore the upper limit of physically plausible generation, we conducted fine-tuning experiments on physics
rewards using MDM as the baseline. Furthermore, PhysDiff
is a physically reliable motion generation method based on
MDM. Due to the unavailability of PhysDiff’s source code,
our comparison was limited to the FID metric using our four
physical metrics. We reproduce the quantitative comparison
results compared our method to PhysDiff using PhysDiff’s
physical metrics calculation in the supplementary material.
Quantitative Comparison. In Table 1 and Table 2,
we present the quantitative comparison results for the HumanML3D [8] and KIT-ML [31] test sets. On both datasets,
our model exhibits physical plausibility close to real performance across Skate ratio, Float, Penetrate, and Clip metrics. This indicates that our RL fine-tuning approach, which
aims to maximize physical law rewards, effectively enables
MDM to incorporate physical commonsense. From the perspectives of FID and R-Precision metrics, our approach significantly improves the FID metrics by 29% and 34% over
MDM without compromising the semantic matching capability on HumanML3D and KIT-ML, respectively. In fact,
there is even a slight improvement in R-Precision. These

5.4. Ablation Studies
In this section, we conduct ablation studies to explore
the effect of varying standard deviation σ and the effect
of importance sampling technique (see the supplementary
material for details) in RL training for MDM on the Hu7

Ours

MDM

“A person crawls forwards on the floor.”

Floating

“A person is sitting while
talking with gestures.”

Floating

Floating

“A man is walking forward, favoring his left leg and shifting his walk.
he is possibly drunk.”

Skating

“The person swings a golf club.”

Skating

Figure 3. Visual results of ReinDiffuse against the MDM. The darker colors indicate the later frame in time.

6. Conclusion

manML3D [8] dataset.

In this paper, we propose ReinDiffuse to enable direct
reinforcement learning (RL) training of Motion Diffusion
Model (MDM) without modifying the network structure. To
address the issue of generating physically implausible motion, we employ frame-wise physical rewards for RL finetuning of MDM. The results demonstrate outstanding capabilities in generating physically plausible motion. Extensive
qualitative and quantitative experiments validate the effectiveness and robustness of our method.

The Effect of Varying Standard Deviation σ. By representing the output of MDM as the mean of a Gaussian distribution and employing a fixed standard deviation, we can
obtain motion likelihood for reinforcement learning training
using PPO. The use of a fixed variance aims to simplify the
training process while striking a balance in the exploration
of RL. The significance of the variance value in RL training
is crucial for incorporating physical commonsense. Therefore, we conducted ablation experiments on sigma, ranging
from 0.1 to 0.3, as shown in Table 3. It can be observed
that ReinDiffuse achieves the best FID performance when
σ is set to 0.15. Consequently, we adopt σ = 0.15 as the
default value for our RL training. Interestingly, the physical performance does not exhibit a consistent increase or
decrease with the variation of sigma. In fact, when we have
very large sigma values (approaching 1), the model fails to
converge. This indicates that sigma plays a crucial role in
the updates for RL.

Limitations: Our limitations lie in the requirement to
formulate a suitable physical plausibility reward function
for each physical problem, which may result in a considerable workload for reward design when confronted with
a multitude of physical problems. Additionally, our physical rewards are calculated based on joint locations, and
some fine-grained physical issues may only arise when rendered as a mesh formats (e.g., interpenetration between
hand and body). Rendering mesh data during training is
extremely time-consuming. Due to computational resource
constraints, we are unable to calculate physical plausibility
8

rewards based on mesh data.
Future Works: We have only explored using physical rewards to enhance the model’s physical performance.
Training with semantically related rewards holds great
promise.

October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XXXV, pages 580–
597. Springer, 2022. 2
[12] Gaoge Han, Shaoli Huang, Mingming Gong, and Jinglei
Tang. Hutumotion: Human-tuned navigation of latent motion diffusion models with minimal feedback. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.12227, 2023. 2
[13] Mohamed Hassan, Yunrong Guo, Tingwu Wang, Michael
Black, Sanja Fidler, and Xue Bin Peng. Synthesizing physical character-scene interactions. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023
Conference Proceedings, pages 1–9, 2023. 3
[14] Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner,
Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans trained by a
two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in neural information processing systems,
30, 2017. 6
[15] Biao Jiang, Xin Chen, Wen Liu, Jingyi Yu, Gang Yu, and
Tao Chen. Motiongpt: Human motion as a foreign language.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14795, 2023. 2, 3
[16] Sham Kakade and John Langford. Approximately optimal
approximate reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the
Nineteenth International Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 267–274, 2002. 4
[17] Korrawe Karunratanakul, Konpat Preechakul, Supasorn
Suwajanakorn, and Siyu Tang. Guided motion diffusion for
controllable human motion synthesis. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 2151–2162, 2023. 2, 6
[18] Michael N Katehakis and Arthur F Veinott Jr. The multiarmed bandit problem: decomposition and computation.
Mathematics of Operations Research, 12(2):262–268, 1987.
4
[19] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114, 2013. 1, 4
[20] Hsin-Ying Lee, Xiaodong Yang, Ming-Yu Liu, Ting-Chun
Wang, Yu-Ding Lu, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Jan Kautz.
Dancing to music. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019. 2
[21] Buyu Li, Yongchi Zhao, Shi Zhelun, and Lu Sheng. Danceformer: Music conditioned 3d dance generation with parametric motion transformer. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pages 1272–
1279, 2022. 2
[22] Jiaman Li, Jiajun Wu, and C Karen Liu. Object motion guided human motion synthesis.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.16237, 2023. 2
[23] Ruilong Li, Shan Yang, David A Ross, and Angjoo
Kanazawa. Ai choreographer: Music conditioned 3d dance
generation with aist++. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 13401–
13412, 2021. 2
[24] Tyler Lu, Dávid Pál, and Martin Pál. Contextual multi-armed
bandits. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth international conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 485–
492. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2010.
4
[25] Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo,
Michelle Lu, Kier Storey, Miles Macklin, David Hoeller,

References
[1] Simon Alexanderson, Rajmund Nagy, Jonas Beskow, and
Gustav Eje Henter. Listen, denoise, action! audio-driven
motion synthesis with diffusion models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.09707, 2022. 2
[2] Nikos Athanasiou, Mathis Petrovich, Michael J. Black, and
Gül Varol. Teach: Temporal action compositions for 3d
humans. In International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV),
September 2022. 2
[3] Kevin Black, Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Ilya Kostrikov, and
Sergey Levine. Training diffusion models with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13301, 2023. 3
[4] Yu-Wei Chao, Jimei Yang, Weifeng Chen, and Jia Deng.
Learning to sit: Synthesizing human-chair interactions via
hierarchical control. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pages 5887–5895,
2021. 3
[5] Xin Chen, Biao Jiang, Wen Liu, Zilong Huang, Bin Fu, Tao
Chen, and Gang Yu. Executing your commands via motion
diffusion in latent space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 18000–18010, June 2023. 2
[6] Xin Chen, Zhuo Su, Lingbo Yang, Pei Cheng, Lan Xu,
Bin Fu, and Gang Yu.
Learning variational motion
prior for video-based motion capture.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.15134, 2022. 2
[7] Ying Fan, Olivia Watkins, Yuqing Du, Hao Liu,
Moonkyung Ryu, Craig Boutilier, Pieter Abbeel, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Kangwook Lee, and Kimin Lee. Dpok:
Reinforcement learning for fine-tuning text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16381, 2023. 3
[8] Chuan Guo, Shihao Zou, Xinxin Zuo, Sen Wang, Wei Ji,
Xingyu Li, and Li Cheng. Generating diverse and natural 3d
human motions from text. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 5152–5161, June 2022. 2, 6, 7, 8
[9] Chuan Guo, Shihao Zou, Xinxin Zuo, Sen Wang, Wei Ji,
Xingyu Li, and Li Cheng. Generating diverse and natural 3d
human motions from text. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 5152–5161, June 2022. 2
[10] Chuan Guo, Shihao Zou, Xinxin Zuo, Sen Wang, Wei Ji,
Xingyu Li, and Li Cheng. Generating diverse and natural 3d
human motions from text. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 5152–5161, 2022. 6
[11] Chuan Guo, Xinxin Zuo, Sen Wang, and Li Cheng. Tm2t:
Stochastic and tokenized modeling for the reciprocal generation of 3d human motions and texts. In Computer Vision–
ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel,

9

and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Fine-grained human feedback
gives better rewards for language model training. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.01693, 2023. 3
[40] Yiming Xie, Varun Jampani, Lei Zhong, Deqing Sun, and
Huaizu Jiang. Omnicontrol: Control any joint at any time for
human motion generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08580,
2023. 2
[41] Jiazheng Xu, Xiao Liu, Yuchen Wu, Yuxuan Tong, Qinkai
Li, Ming Ding, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong. Imagereward: Learning and evaluating human preferences for textto-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05977,
2023. 3
[42] Sijie Yan, Zhizhong Li, Yuanjun Xiong, Huahan Yan, and
Dahua Lin. Convolutional sequence generation for skeletonbased action synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 4394–
4402, 2019. 2
[43] Ye Yuan, Jiaming Song, Umar Iqbal, Arash Vahdat, and Jan
Kautz. Physdiff: Physics-guided human motion diffusion
model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 16010–16021, 2023. 1,
3, 6, 7
[44] Fan Zhang, Naye Ji, Fuxing Gao, and Yongping Li. Diffmotion: Speech-driven gesture synthesis using denoising diffusion model. In International Conference on Multimedia
Modeling, pages 231–242. Springer, 2023. 2
[45] Jianrong Zhang, Yangsong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Shaoli
Huang, Yong Zhang, Hongwei Zhao, Hongtao Lu, and Xi
Shen. T2m-gpt: Generating human motion from textual
descriptions with discrete representations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2301.06052, 2023. 2
[46] Mingyuan Zhang, Zhongang Cai, Liang Pan, Fangzhou
Hong, Xinying Guo, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. Motiondiffuse: Text-driven human motion generation with diffusion
model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.15001, 2022. 2, 3, 6
[47] Mingyuan Zhang, Xinying Guo, Liang Pan, Zhongang Cai,
Fangzhou Hong, Huirong Li, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu.
Remodiffuse: Retrieval-augmented motion diffusion model.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01116, 2023. 2, 3
[48] Yan Zhang, Michael J Black, and Siyu Tang. Perpetual motion: Generating unbounded human motion. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.13886, 2020. 2
[49] Rui Zhao, Hui Su, and Qiang Ji. Bayesian adversarial human
motion synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
6225–6234, 2020. 2

Nikita Rudin, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa, et al. Isaac
gym: High performance gpu-based physics simulation for
robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470, 2021. 3
[26] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training
language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
35:27730–27744, 2022. 1, 3, 4
[27] Liang Pan, Jingbo Wang, Buzhen Huang, Junyu Zhang, Haofan Wang, Xu Tang, and Yangang Wang. Synthesizing physically plausible human motions in 3d scenes. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.09036, 2023. 3
[28] Georgios Pavlakos, Vasileios Choutas, Nima Ghorbani,
Timo Bolkart, Ahmed AA Osman, Dimitrios Tzionas, and
Michael J Black. Expressive body capture: 3d hands,
face, and body from a single image. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 10975–10985, 2019. 2
[29] Mathis Petrovich, Michael J. Black, and Gül Varol. TEMOS:
Generating diverse human motions from textual descriptions.
In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2022.
2
[30] André Susano Pinto, Alexander Kolesnikov, Yuge Shi, Lucas
Beyer, and Xiaohua Zhai. Tuning computer vision models
with task rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08242, 2023.
1
[31] Matthias Plappert, Christian Mandery, and Tamim Asfour.
The kit motion-language dataset. Big Data, 4(4):236–252,
dec 2016. 2, 6, 7
[32] Davis Rempe, Tolga Birdal, Aaron Hertzmann, Jimei Yang,
Srinath Sridhar, and Leonidas J Guibas. Humor: 3d human
motion model for robust pose estimation. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision,
pages 11488–11499, 2021. 2
[33] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017. 1, 4, 6, 7
[34] Guy Tevet, Sigal Raab, Brian Gordon, Yonatan Shafir,
Amit H Bermano, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Human motion diffusion model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14916, 2022. 1, 2,
3, 4, 6, 7
[35] Jonathan Tseng, Rodrigo Castellon, and C Karen Liu. Edge:
Editable dance generation from music. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.10658, 2022. 2
[36] Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete
representation learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017. 2
[37] Jiashun Wang, Huazhe Xu, Jingwei Xu, Sifei Liu, and Xiaolong Wang. Synthesizing long-term 3d human motion and interaction in 3d scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
9401–9411, 2021. 2
[38] Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning. Machine
learning, 8:229–256, 1992. 1, 4
[39] Zeqiu Wu, Yushi Hu, Weijia Shi, Nouha Dziri, Alane Suhr,
Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Noah A Smith, Mari Ostendorf,

10

